# cs465-fullstack
CS-465 Full Stack Development with MEAN

## Architecture

#### Compare and contrast the types of frontend development you used in your full stack project, including Express HTML, JavaScript, and the single-page application (SPA).
Over the course of development of this application, we went through the process of building a basic frontend for the site in plain static HTML/CSS with some dynamic pieces in javascript, later moving to templated pages using handlebars (a JS library), and using dynamic sections in javascript from data stored in local files and the MongoDB database. These static and server side rendered methods are much different than the angular single page application, which while using HTML and CSS, is rendered client side in the browser. As a single page application the structure is much different as well, where instead of different urls that lead to separate pages, there is a single page that has components that update inside the single page, avoiding full page reloads, and aftere the initial loading phase performs much quicker than most server side rendering pages would.

#### Why did the backend use a NoSQL MongoDB database?
The choice to use MongoDB for the database comes from a few attributes specific to that style of database (NoSQL), along with the specific flavor of NoSQL called a 'document db'. In Mongo the 'documents' are json objects, which greatly simplifies the setup, testing, and all operations between the code and the database as the JSON objects can be tested as JSON in a local file before using the database, and the objects are not transformed into multiple underlying tables and built using queries the way they generally are in a relational SQL database. While Mongo can perform operations similar to joins, in our case we just stored entire context objects we needed like trip data or user data, making filtering for the results we wanted extremely simple. It is this overall approach to simplicity that allowed us to focus on the full stack application without being mired in database specific code. The mongoose JS framework also makes interacting directly with the MongoDB database very simple, and it integrates well into our existing JS setup.

## Functionality

#### How is JSON different from Javascript and how does JSON tie together the frontend and backend development pieces?
JSON is a format for data (Javascript object notation), while javascript itself is a programming language. JSON is used to tie together the frontend and backend systems in our case, as well as the database since we can store JSON documents in MongoDB. Since the frontend in our case is either an angular SPA or server side rendered templating both of which end up presenting their 'view' component in the browser, and both of which request information from the backend and thus the database, we would want a simple way to pass information between all of theses components. JSON offers this compatibility with the database as mentioned, but it is also a simple format that can be passed between frontend and backend server components. We use javascript for both ends in this project, but JSON is language agnostic and there are processing libraries for it in all of the popular web programming languages, so swapping in a new frontend or backend only requires writing new code but we can maintain the same data format throughout.

#### Provide instances in the full stack process when you refactored code to improve functionality and efficiencies, and name the benefits that come from reusable user interface (UI) components.
In the full stack development process, one area that required refactors due to the project structure was moving from static HTML pages to templates with handlebars, in combination with testing pages with JSON data in a local file and then refactoring our code to use the database to pull this data later in the project. Having reusable components was a major benefit in the UI, specifically using angular as adding a new component and getting it up to speed in terms of presentation with existing components just required some small copy/pasting of specific UI elements, and this could be further reduced with more common components being factored out later. So setup of new components was fast and simple, requiring little debugging, meaning after the original development of a few components

## Testing

#### Methods for request and retrieval necessitate various types of API testing of endpoints, in addition to the difficulties of testing with added layers of security. Explain your understanding of methods, endpoints, and security in a full stack application.
Testing the completed version of our full stack app was very complex compared to just testing a backend API, specifically due to the fact that when you apply security and authentication to the whole stack, you now need to go throug the authentication flow to test or do anything, as well as deal with development environment specific issues like handling CORS for the localhost.

The base point to start at when considering security in the context of this question is an endpoint, which is a URL in our case in a REST API, where information may be passed to the server or just retrieved depending on the endpoint and it's functionality. An endpoint in our application like /trips may contain multiple subendpoints for different tasks or different presentations of data. After this we need to consider methods (HTTP Methods) like GET, PUT, POST, etc. These methods specify what type of requests can be made to an endpoint, where GET is used to retrieve data, POST is used to add new data, and PUT is used to edit data. A single endpoint may allow multiple methods like /trips taking a tripCode parameter and allowing retrieval of a trip, making a new trip, or modifying an existing trip's data. Specifying only the methods needed on each endpoint is critical to avoid security issues, using a process known as least privilege, we only want to allow a user to do the bare minimum they need to on a specific endpoint. In regards to testing we would want to test every applicable method on a specific endpoint as well as testing that non allowed methods will not function.

Security in the full stack application has many points to consider, from the frontend where a user may need to begint their authentication flow while that process will traverse the frontend, backend, and require information stored in the database to authenticate a user. Testing the whole auth flow from the ground up may require testing that specific requests from the backend return correct data and don't return too much or irrelevant data that may be considered a security leak. After this we can test the backend API specifically to see that it returns the correct information from each method as well. Once determining that this is secure we can trigger tests from the frontend UI that calls the backend API in order to determine that the whole flow works and is secure. It is also important to test production app factors that we did not reach in this project including things like HTTPS/SSL, input validation when we take in user data to ensure we only process valid inputs, as well as authorization or the actions that a user is allowed to take once they are authenticated match what we expect a user with their role (in a role based authorization setup) to be able to do.

## Reflection

#### How has this course helped you in reaching your professional goals? What skills have you learned, developed, or mastered in this course to help you become a more marketable candidate in your career field?
The biggest gains I made due to this course as a platform engineer and SRE who already does a lot of backend development and has experience with databases was the development of the different frontends including the server side rendering as well as using angular for the admin SPA. In addition while I have looked at javascript and typescript before on some projects I had not done a lot of development with either and have already begun looking at implementing typescript for some projects at work due to the strong type system which many projects in the infrastructure-as-code world lack being written in python, or are extremely verbose having been written in Golang. Typescript seems like a much better middleground between these two languages and like it might fit well in many of the projects that I work on already.

I think the overall experience of building a fullstack project was helpful as well, as it rounded out my view of the entire stack as well as gave me experience with technologies that I haven't really used much in MongoDB, angular, express, etc. as I mostly work on Golang and Python or specific DSL's for tooling. Working on all of the pieces together has cleared up some misconceptions I had about how frontends are tied to the backend (I basically treated these as a black box before), and seeing a whole project through has brought a new interest for me in frontend work, and I've begun applying it to many of my personal projects I wanted to work on whereas in the past I would just use bootstrap and render everything server side in python as I couldn't really make good looking frontends and as soon as I needed the complexity of javascript I lost interest.

